---
title: "De pierres et de rivières : mobilité et interactions dans les Laurentides méridionales"
collection: publications
category: thesis
permalink: /publication/2023-12-31-thesis
excerpt: 'Master thesis.'
date: 2023-12-31
venue: 'CorpusUL, dépôt institutionnel de l'Université Laval'
paperurl: 'https://corpus.ulaval.ca/entities/publication/ee9661a6-f08a-4900-a6af-1d5953f5e2e0'
citation: 'Pilette, Olivier. 2023. De pierres et de rivières : mobilité et interactions dans les Laurentides méridionales. Master’s thesis, Université Laval, Québec.'
---

The goal of this research is to explore the social aspect of mobility among hunter-gatherer communities who inhabited, traversed, and navigated the southern Laurentians region within the territory that corresponds to the drainages of the Lièvre, Rouge, and Petite Nation rivers. The research proposes an analysis and comparison of archaeological data from a sample of 7,861 lithic artifacts found at 79 archaeological sites. These sites were selected based on the abundance and diversity of their lithic assemblage and their spatial representativeness. The study is based on a two-part methodology. The first part involves a macroscopic characterization of lithic tool and debris. The second part utilizes tools and concepts from network analysis and graph theory to conceptualize interactions between archaeological sites. Therefore, the research integrates a relational perspective of culture. This research demonstrates that the southern Laurentians region constitutes a relatively homogeneous cultural universe, and the most significant cultural variations are found between the southern part of the area of study (the Ottawa River Valley) and the northern part (Upper Mauricie). While new phenomena emerge from the projection of six graphs, the lack of chronological control over the data limits the interpretive scope of the method.

The research shows that the regional distribution of raw materials does not indicate territoriality structured by the drainages of the Lièvre, Rouge, and Petite Nation rivers. Instead, despite the lack of chronological data control, a clear distinction is observed between the northernmost sites of Upper Mauricie and the southernmost ones in the Ottawa Valley. It highlights the role of these rivers as cultural interaction “vectors” connecting the boreal world and the Ottawa Valley. Network analysis and visualizations are the fundamental tools used to understand the dataset.
